@KafkaListener -------marks a java method as a  kafka message consumer handler.

Consumer Group:

A consumer group guarantees that a message received by  one consumer of the group is not consumed  by
another consumer of the same group.
The partitions are equally  allocated to the consumers of the consumer group.
ie if there are two consumers of the same group  running and if there are 4 partitions in a topic,
two partitions  will be allocated to each consumer.


A single  partition can not be shared multiple consumers of the same group.





if there are 4 consumers of the same group  running and  there are 4 partitions in a topic,
1 partition  will be allocated to each consumer.

if there are 3 consumers of the same group  running and  there are 4 partitions in a topic,
1 partition each will be allocated to two  consumers  and 2 partitions  will  be allocated   to the 
third consumer.

if there are 5 consumers of the same group  running and  there are 4 partitions in a topic,
1 partition each will be allocated to 4  consumers  and the 5th consumer will be idle.

offset:

Offset is a unique sequential id assigned to each message in a partition.

log-end-offset:

The next offset to which a message will be published in a partition.

current-offset:

The next offset from which a consumer group will consume a message.
This will have different values for different consumer groups based on the consumption of messages by the respective consumer group.

lag = log_end_offset - current_offset 

ie lag denotes the number of messages yet to be consumed by a consumer group


A group is registered  with the topic when it consumes the first  message from the topic.

By default, a newly registered group will consume only the latest messages.

ie for a newly registered group, the log_end_offset and current_offset will be same.

if you want a  newly registered group to consume all the older messages, the auto offset reset property should be set to earliest.


kafka cluster:

Collection of kafka brokers connected to the same zookeeper url.
In the latest version,  it is collection kafka brokers connected to the same kafka controller quorum.

A single topic can spread across multiple brokers.
ie a topic is distributed across multiple brokers in the cluster.
Each broker can contain a subset of partitions.
Each partition is replicated in multiple brokers to support fault tolerance.
The number of copies of partitions is decided based on the replication factor of the topic.

Assume that there 5 brokers in the cluster and the topic contains 4 partitions with a replication factor of 3.

sample distribution:

broker-1-------0,1
broker-2-------2,3,0
broker-3-------1,2
broker-4-------3,0
broker-5-------1,2,3

		broker.id	port	log-dir
broker-1	   1		9091	c:/kafka-logs/broker-1
broker-2	   2		9092	c:/kafka-logs/broker-2
broker-3	   3		9093	c:/kafka-logs/broker-3

steps:

1. shutdown any zookeeper or kafka instances if they are running.

2.  create 3 copies of %KAFKA_HOME%\config\server.properties and rename them as server-1.properties,server2.properties and server-3.properties respectively.

3. modify broker.id, listeners and logs-dir properties in these files as per the above table.
4. create 3 batch files namely start-server-1.bat,start-server-2.bat and  start-server-3.bat 
under %KAFKA_HOME% directory.

%KAFKA_HOME%\start-server-1.bat

start "Server-1" kafka-server-start config\server-1.properties


%KAFKA_HOME%\start-server-2.bat

start "Server-2" kafka-server-start config\server-2.properties


%KAFKA_HOME%\start-server-3.bat

start "Server-3" kafka-server-start config\server-3.properties

5.  clear the c:/tmp directory

6. start the zookeeper.

zookeeper-server-start c:\kafka_2.12-3.4.1\config\zookeeper.properties

7. double click on start-server-1.bat, start-server-2.bat and start-server-3.bat to start the respective
servers.



specifying the url of any one broker of the cluster is equivalent to specifying the url of the entire  cluster.

localhost:9091 is equivalent to localhost:9091,localhost:9092,localhost:9093


Each partition is associated with 1 leader broker(also called a leader) which receives all read and write requests for that partition and 0 or more follower brokers(also called followers).
The followers passively replicate from the leader.

When the leader crashes, any one of the followers will be elected as the leader.

ISR----In Sync Replicas-----Replicas which are in sync with the leader


Kubernetes(k8s):
Open source platform designed to automate deployment, scaling and management of containerized applications.

Docker is used to isolate, package and containerize applications.
Kubernetes  is an orchestration platform used to manage and scale these containers across a cluster of servers.

Docker container is like a single host  and kubernetes provides multi node clusters of docker containers.

Kubernetes restarts  failed containers and replaces dead nodes.

Docker reads a Dockerfile , packages the application code and builds an image.
Kubernetes pulls that image and deploys it across a distributed network of virtual machines,  managing its traffic , scaling and monitoring its operational health.







